---
title: One Hour Photo Hack (Quick IKEA Phone Tripod)
data: 2009-01-18
---

I'm still umming and ahhing over whether to get a new camera, or whether I'd
rather make do with my film cameras (both of which I love) and my camera phone
(which I carry everywhere and has surprisingly good quality). As a camera, the
K850i is really only lacking two things for me; a tripod mount and manual
controls.

I can't do much about the controls, but I can do something about the lack of
mount. What I originally had in mind was a quite slim vice-like idea, going
around the body of the camera (like a cradle it sat in).

Unfortunately, if you still want access to the buttons and the display on the
rear, and you need the autofocus, flash and lens unobstructed, about the only
option is actually to grip it at the sides.

Rummaging through the pile in the workshop, I found the best part of an Ikea
step-stool, complete with those barrel-nuts that anyone who's assembled much
Swedish flat-pack will be familiar with. Again, the idea has changed a little,
because I reckoned if I cut it to size, I could make the phone fit inside,
leaving a gap for fingers to operate the camera, and then tighten one end to
make it 'grip'.

_I'll admit it_, I messed up a little, and cut the wrong end of one piece. As I
wasn't bothered enough to do it over, I could see how the design could still
work, albeit being a little trickier to fit together, and with more of a gap,
and less of a tight fit. To make up the gap, and have the fit be snug, I needed
something that would grip and would also give a little. In the past I've used
cut up bicycle tubes, and I wanted to this time, but I appear to have misplaced
my stock, so I used some pipe lagging instead.

Finally, I drilled a hole slightly smaller than the M6 nut that I used, and
hammered that in place for a tight grip. M6 is not quite correct for a camera
tripod mount, so I'm using washers to fill the gap between where the tripod
screw fits and the rubber part of the original tripod.

The finished product, below, is far less refined than the one in my head, and I
don't see myself using it too often, but it does technically fill the brief,
took less than an hour, and was quite fun to build.

![Phone Bits](/Gfx09/PhoneBits.jpeg)

![Phone Portrait](/Gfx09/PhonePortrait.jpeg)