---
date: "2016-04-10"
layout: post
title: "PiGlow to Adafruit Trinket Adaptor"
---

Over the last couple of weeks I've been building a flash-y LED box thing. It's
not an overly ambitious project, but it uses up some parts I had in my bin
which were too nice *not* to use, and it let me practice my PCB and 3D design
to go about building something which is more-or-less a product. Far more
finished than the "shove all the wires in and screw the lid shut" approach I
often favour.

I had a [3.3V Adafruit Trinket][trinket] and a [Pimoroni PiGlow][piglow] going
spare. The GPIO on my Pi is taken up with another Pimoroni gadget, the
Pibrella. I had gotten the [PiGlow speaking I2C before][before]; it was one of
my first experiments with the [BusPirate][], so I was reasonably confident
this could be made to work simply.

![The PiGlow](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1597/26222588981_5f3d849766_b.jpg)

[trinket]: https://www.adafruit.com/products/1500
[piglow]: https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/piglow
[before]: https://www.insom.me.uk/2014/04/controlling-a-piglow-with-the-bus-pirate/
[BusPirate]: http://dangerousprototypes.com/docs/Bus_Pirate

After a quick breadboard test to verify that my last write-up was accurate
about which pins I would need, I sketched out a rough schematic. How rough?

![Bad Schematic](/img/piglow/sch.png)

Rough.

Even with such a simple design, having a schematic lets me verify that the PCB
routing is electrically correct. This is opposed to how I did things on [my
badge design][badge], where it's effectively a "free-hand" PCB.

[badge]: /project/badges/

![Nicer PCB](/img/piglow/pcb.png)

I wanted the project to be small for aesthetic reasons, but also because [OSH
Park][osh] charge by the square inch. I got things in at 1.01", which made the
design $5.05 for three boards, delivered.

[osh]: https://oshpark.com/

About two weeks later, my Perfect Purple PCBs arrived. I grabbed some pins
from work and soldered them up. This is where I learned why they give you
three boards. I put the pins on the *wrong side* of the first board. I build
the second board correctly, but realised that putting female pin headers on
the underside made everything far too bulky. At least I was able to verify
that the circuit worked correctly on that version.

On the third attempt, I soldered the Trinket directly to the board and clipped
the leads. It's about as snug as I can make it without risking a short:

![Vertical Space](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1520/25683992694_c199837888_b.jpg)

![Pins Left Out](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1639/26196421262_4e0082e14c_b.jpg)

You can see where I left some of the passive pins out, rather than drilling
holes for the entire header. This was to make it a bit easier to route the
traces - I could make the gaps I needed by removing spare pins.

I got out my digital calipers to measure some distances, so I could start to
figure out the box design. My notes:

    17.5 bottom of piglow pcb to further usb connector
    40x40 width of circuit board bits
    6x9 cut out of usb
    9x12 'pre' cut out
    8 bottom of bottom pcb to further of usb

As a good European, all measurements are in millimetres. The 17.5mm is the
distance from the bottom of the USB connector to the bottom of the PiGlow PCB.
I measured this because I planned to have a post rise out of the bottom of the
box to meet it. The 8mm from the bottom PCB to the bottom of the USB refers to
my adaptor board - another post is going to rise up to match that, too.

![Paper CAD](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1541/25745243514_09874a2ee5_b.jpg)

Even with some great CAD tools available, I still like to use graph paper for
this stage of things. I don't get distracted by the gap between what I think
up and how to get the tools to make that happen. As you can see, I drew this
backwards and had to reverse it later, but with 2mm squares I could convert
this 1:1 scale drawing into Autodesk 123D reasonably easily.

![Closed Box](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1544/26076294310_5ba27fbdc5_b.jpg)

Look how it turned out! It fits snugly. Really snugly, because I forgot to put
a hole in for the USB connector: whoops. Still, the two posts were a good idea
and they *did* work first time:

![Posts](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1610/26076293400_fba049a8ae_b.jpg)

So, I actually put a USB port in, using my measurements above. The "pre cut
out" is the indented area where a mini USB lead may be a bit thick and need
extra clearance. That part worked well too:

![With Hole](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1603/25744292794_76fbb730b3_b.jpg)

![CAD Hole](/img/piglow/boxer.png)

(If your browser supports WebGL you can [spin the box around][s] courtesy of
the GitHub STL viewer).

I used a bit of hot glue (not pictured) to fix everything in place, and it's
really firmly together. I'm genuinely pleased with this, even if it is *just*
a box.

I had a lot more trouble printing the white lid to act as diffuser. I printed
one with four posts which locked on to the box: that worked fine, but one of
the posts broke right away. I decided that putting a lip in place would be
better, but since deciding that haven't been able to get a successful print
out of my 3D printer.

![Top Piece](/img/piglow/top.png)

[s]: https://github.com/insom/PiGlow-Trinket-Box/blob/master/3D/boxer.stl

The white plastic I have is all ABS and more sensitive to print, and every
time I try I've seen curling at the edges. It looks like my first print was a
fluke. So, in the interests of wrapping things up while I figure out what's
going wrong with my ABS printing, I've used Gorilla glue and a clamp to seal
the box. I sure hope I don't need to make any changes!

![Glued](https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1578/26076291080_f7e91c021e_b.jpg)

The software is the final piece. You can view it [directly on GitHub][d]
&mdash; in its current form it just sets random LEDs to random brightness
levels, but that's actually pretty visually pleasing. I'll add support for
serial control at a later date, when I get bored of mesmerising lights.

[d]: https://github.com/insom/PiGlow-Trinket-Box/blob/master/Arduino/TrinketGlow.ino

The whole project can be viewed and downloaded from [its GitHub repo][g].

[g]: https://github.com/insom/PiGlow-Trinket-Box/
