---
title: XML Porting under Python
date: 2005-02-02
---

[Comments](http://www.artima.com/forums/flat.jsp?forum=122&thread=91831)

Wow. There's been some buzz about XML in the Python community lately. I
don't have enough time to read python-dev, so I just look at the pretty
blogs, but there's been [impressive improvements][1] and [flame-fests][2]
both. I even got quoted in [one of them][3].

First off, I got some email about how my benchmarks were performed. One person
actually called my set up unrealistic. Um. My setup *was* essentially real.  I
parsed an actual XML file my application has to parse *and* I factored in the
load time of Python and the import time of the module. My application is a CGI
(for the moment), so both of these are important issues.

IMHO, more people should benchmark under their intended use, rather than
*solely* go by labratory condition tests. (Though the latter are, of course,
very important).

Secondly, I ported my application to Ft.Xml. Having read [another Uche
article][2], I saw that I could receive a performance boost using
FourThought's latest DOM-like toolkit. Adapting my previous benchmarks
produced a 5x increase in speed over 4DOM. 

It's not 90x, but it's going in the right direction.

I sat down to adapt the application, and ran immediately into two snags.

1. Because the parser is *terribly* name-space aware, you cannot use
   <code>getAttribute</code>. All occurrances must be replaced with
   <code>getAttributeNS</code>. This was a bit of a search-and-replace job, but
   annoying. <br />
2. The parser doesn't support <code>getElementsByName</code>, you must use an
   XPath expression, or build your own DOM-traversal code. This is a little
   annoying and largely over-kill. What makes it bullet-worthy is that
   Uche has a page outlining [not one but several alternatives][4]. Why not
   just implement one in his code? I used the wasteful XPath version.

Now, the usual caveats apply- I didn't pay for the development of the code,
so I have only limited right to bitch and moan. It is an improvement, and it
did allow me to replace my existing code in a couple of hours. A five-fold
increase *is* impressive.

However, it is neither Pythonic like Amara or cElementTree, and also not even
close to being a DOM. In Java, I can rip out a DOM and replace it with another
one, just by toggling my classpath and re-running my unit-tests.

It's both good and bad that Python doesn't have an XML parser standard. Hooray
for being individual and creative. Boo and sucks for replacing a library with
an equivalent meaning an application overhaul.  

[1]: http://effbot.org/zone/celementtree.htm
[2]: http://www.oreillynet.com/cs/user/view/wlg/6291
[3]: http://online.effbot.org/2005_01_01_archive.htm#20050125
[4]: http://uche.ogbuji.net/tech/akara/nodes/2004-06-19/get-elements
