---
title: Using a Cisco PIX Without NAT
date: 2005-08-07
layout: post
---

I searched at length for a good treatment of this subject, and for the most
part had to puzzle through it for myself. Now, as fodder for Google, here's how
to configure a PIX firewall without having to use network address translation.

The Cisco PIX is pre-disposed to wanting you to use NAT for the 'inside'
(secure) portion of your network. Some of this probably comes from the fact
that the PIX was [initially a NAT-only device][1], which has evolved into a
firewall since coming to Cisco.

However, there are many reasons you would not want this, including sharing the
broadcast segment with non-NAT hosts (not that I recommend this) and for
general ease of configuration of some protocols that are generally broken by
NAT. The one I am foremost thinking of here is RTSP.

In order to allow traffic to pass between your PIX and the world, without NAT
you need to:

* Add the outside & inside interfaces to the global address pools. By default,
  these commands will add all IPs within the subnet specified by the mask on
  the interface.

	global (outside) 1 interface
	global (inside) 2 interface

* Create NAT 0 access lists for inbound and outbound traffic. These are not the
  same as firewall rule lists- they only specify which packets will be NATed or
  not. As we're doing NAT 0 (which means no translation), we can let everything
  be NATed.

	access-list out2in permit ip any any
	access-list in2out permit ip any any

* Associate the access lists with NAT 0.

	nat (outside) 0 access-list out2in outside
	nat (inside) 0 access-list in2out

* Interesting side effect: because we're doing NAT in both directions, firewall
  rules apply to outbound traffic as well as inbound traffic. Your firewall
  rules obviously need to take this into account. You might want a simple:

	access-list foo permit ip INTERNAL.IP INTERNAL.NETMASK any

	to get outbound traffic flowing.

* Associate this access list with the outside world:

	access-group foo in interface outside

* Apply your own firewall rules as normal.

* Enjoy.

[1]: http://home.cfl.rr.com/dealgroup/pix/pix_page_history.htm
