---
title: The Problem of The Problem of Web Frameworks in Python
date: 2005-03-12
---

Contrary to [some interpretations][1], I'm not against the array of web
frameworks available for Python. Let a thousand flowers bloom, and all that.

That said, I do think that it's extremely confusing for newcomers to Python.
Yes, Ruby suffered from a similar lack of a dominant standard until Rails
came along. But then, Ruby also suffered from a similar lack of adoption in the
web realm.

During my search for work last month, I found several Ruby on Rails jobs going,
already, and numerous Zope/Plone contracts. You just don't see contracts
for Quixote or CherryPy, because business people like dominant standards.

(I should point out that I did get contacted about some Nevow work, and
while it's great that there are people out there targetting commercial
work using more Pythonic frameworks, sadly it was the exception.)

Smalltalk does not have a dominant standard, but then, Smalltalk has very
little momentum in the web space. Seaside may fix this, but it's aimed
toward a very defined set of problems that are solved by a continuation
based approach.

The common thread in Jeffrey's Java list ("Java Server Faces, Struts, Tapestry,
J2EE's web parts, JSP, Servlets"), is support for running in a servlet
container, and the baggage that comes with that. You can run a sub-request
from a Servlet or JSP for a Struts app, you can't (yet) do that with
say Nevow and Quixote, but WSGI may change some of this.

Let's hope.

[1]: http://toulouse.amber.org/archives/2005/03/12/numerous_web_frameworks.html
