---
title: Making djbdns and dnscache play with Ubuntu
date: 2008-07-15
layout: post
---

Now that djbdns is [public domain](http://cr.yp.to/distributors.html)
it can be included in Debian-based distributions. [Gerrit
Pape](http://smarden.org/pape/) has done the hard work of packaging everything
up and submitting to the ftpmasters at Debian, and it looks to have been
accepted into sid.

I, however, run Ubuntu, which hasn't imported this package yet. Ideally, I'd
also like to avoid running daemontools, as upstart does a similar job and
already comes with Ubuntu.

Install the prerequisites
-------------------------

	sudo apt-get install build-essential

Grab the source files
---------------------

	mkdir djbtmp
	cd djbtmp
	wget http://ftp.de.debian.org/debian/pool/main/d/djbdns/djbdns_1.05-3.dsc
	wget http://ftp.de.debian.org/debian/pool/main/d/djbdns/djbdns_1.05.orig.tar.gz
	wget http://ftp.de.debian.org/debian/pool/main/d/djbdns/djbdns_1.05-3.diff.gz

Unpack the source and build
---------------------------

	dpkg-source -x djbdns_1.05-3.dsc
	cd djbdns-1.05
	sudo dpkg-buildpackage
	cd ..
	sudo dpkg -i dbndns_1.05-3_i386.deb # djbdns with Debian improvements

Great! Now we have the binaries installed, you can do a <code>dpkg -L</code> to
check everything is there.

We'll need to create a user for dnscache to run as, and a directory to run
from. Replace 192.168.1.1 with your own IP below.

Create user and directory
-------------------------

	sudo useradd dnscache
	sudo dnscache-conf dnscache dnscache /var/lib/dnscache 192.168.1.1
	id dnscache

This has created a directory suitable for running from daemontools, which
is not what we're doing. Off to upstart! Create the following file in /etc/event.d/dnscache. You'll need to gid and uid that <code>id dnscache</code> returned earlier to fill in below (in place of 1, which is daemon). Once again, replace 192.168.1.1 with your own IP address.

	start on stopped rc2
	start on stopped rc3
	start on stopped rc4
	start on stopped rc5

	stop on runlevel 1
	stop on runlevel 6

	respawn
	script
		UID=1
		GID=1
		CACHESIZE=1000000
		DATALIMIT=3000000
		IP=192.168.1.1
		IPSEND=0.0.0.0
		ROOT=/var/lib/dnscache/root
		export UID GID CACHESIZE DATALIMIT IP IPSEND ROOT
		cd /var/lib/dnscache
		exec <seed
		dnscache 2>&1 | logger -t dnscache
	end script

At this point, you may be best carrying on using [DJB's own
instructions](http://cr.yp.to/djbdns/dnscache.html). If you're setting up for
a small internal network, you will probably want to do the following to allow
local clients to do recursive lookups:

	sudo touch /var/lib/dnscache/root/ip/192.168.1

I'm eager to hear people's success and failure stories; this post is motivated
by my pain in upgrading BIND instances to protect them from the latest round
of DNS exploits.

When looking at the vendor status I saw that, despite not having had an update
in years, djbdns was not affected - I'd like to see more djb-ware in use, and
perhaps integrating with the environment (in this case Debian / Ubuntu) will
help that.

Update: Yes, I forgot to say, you must do <code>sudo start dnscache</code> before the service will start.
