---
title: On the responsibility of running a well-linked website
date: 2004-06-13
---

My website, like most people's, is just a
hobby. I work as a web developer (at least in part), and insom.me.uk gives me
the chance to do things as correctly as I can, without having to worry about
budget approval or the page scrolling when people use 640x480. It's XHTML 1.0
Strict, it has valid CSS, <acronym title="Really Several Synonyms"
>RSS</acronym> and Atom, it's automatically generated by a handful of scripts,
and (ironically) its traffic out strips several of our commercial customers.

Of course, with it being my hobby, I feel the need to mess with it now and
then. Sometimes I want to try out a new look (which I've done a couple of
times in the past) or add in new feed formats (like when I added RDF and Atom
alongside my default RSS 2.0). It's my site, so I should be able to. But I can't.

I've written some new blog software (you're soaking in it), mainly for fun,
and I wanted to deploy it. But what about my existing blog? It has less than
100 entries, but some of my older ones still receive a few hundred hits a
month. We're not talking about Yahoo.com here, but I don't want to
inconvinience those folks. More to the point: I know, and I warn customers,
that <a href="http://www.w3.org/Provider/Style/URI"
title="TBL from W3C on URIs">Cool URIs Don't Change</a>. So what are my
options?

* Break the URIs, put in a 404 page to point people in the right direction, and <em>eat humble pie</em> regarding Cool URIs.
* Leave the old, blosxom powered, blog up there, use a new URL for my new site, and put a prominent posting at the top saying that I've moved.
* Port all of my entries to my new weblog, and use `mod_rewrite` to fix up incoming links.

I've decided to go with door #3 and port over my entries. It beats leaving
a bunch of content up on software I'm disinclined to support, and it keeps
everything in one place.  Of course, I haven't actually done it yet- this is
the only entry here at the moment- because it's going to take a while, and I
don't want to delay launching my <em>new</em> weblog, which I've written in
all of one day (a day in which I also fitted in 5 hours of D&amp;D).
