---
title: Power Outage
layout: post
---

**TL;DR** tiny.tilde.website was down for over a week, but it's not moving to the cloud. It will continue to run from my basement.

<hr>

I'm writing this on day _eight_ of the power outage in Ottawa, Ontario.

A derecho waltzed through our city last Saturday knocking down power lines, poles and trees. Houses and cars were wrecked and people were injured and killed.

All things considered, I have been very lucky. I have a flexible job and I can work from anywhere I can get Internet access. I have a place to go work from (on the other side of the city, sadly) which has power so I can charge up devices and use their Wi-Fi. My son's school is closed and my wife has the same flexibility as me (although, it's her office we're going to).

One unfortunate effect of the outage is that [tiny.tilde.website][ttw] has been down since around an hour after the power went out. It runs from my basement. I have a UPS but not a generator. The UPS carried on for an hour, which is decent, but nothing but the most extreme preparation could have kept the site up. (Even if I had a generator, the petrol to run it would be $40-80 per day. No thanks!)

I do computer operations for a living, so it hurts when a service that I run suffers sustained downtime. My first reaction was to figure out a way to copy `ttw` to a virtual machine and get it up and running. The quality of connection I've been able to get nixed this, but after a little time sitting with the question (unable to do anything proactive about it) -- I don't want that.

(Also: a few people contacted me to check in and also to remind me not to stress about things being down. Thanks!)

I fundamentally do not want to live in a world where the Internet is something that lives in a big building in an industrial park. I understand that some people taking part in the "participatory Internet" (i.e. fediverse, self hosting, gemini, gopher, tilde, etc.) have chosen to use cloud providers: good for them! More sites self-hosting, whereever they can, is a net good. A gopher hole or a WordPress blog is better for the technological diversity of the Internet than a Facebook page, even if it's hosted on Amazon Web Services.

But I _can_ self-host on my own hardware. I have the equipment and skills and a fibre-optic line coming to my house. Most of the time I have good quality power, coming from Ontario's very low-carbon grid.

And sometimes, when a natural disaster strikes a city, my sites will be offline. And that seems reasonable to me.

[ttw]: https://tiny.tilde.website/
